# ClonMapper Protocol

## Setup

To make changes to the document you can clone this repo locally and use any plain text editor you prefer.

```bash
git clone git@github.com:brocklab/clonmapper-protocol.git
```

Alternatively you can make quick changes using the built-in github [VS-code editor](https://github.dev/brocklab/clonmapper-protocol).

If you would like to generate a new pdf file you will probably want to ensure at a minimum you have installed `make`.

This document takes advantage of pandoc to convert a markdown doc (`protocol.md`) to a well-formatted pdf.
To run these locally you will need to additionally install `pandoc` and `tex-live`.
*NOTE*: the full `tex-live` distribution is quite large.
Alternatively, if you have `docker` installed then you can append your `make` commands with `DOCKER=true`.

For a list of the common commands run `make help`.

## Generating the PDF

To make a new pdf you should only need to run the below command.

```bash
make pdf
```

This will generate a new pdf document at `./clonmapper-protocol-<rev>.pdf`.
If you make changes and commit them a new `rev` id will be appended to the file based on the `HEAD` of the repo.

## Generating the Website

To get started generate a python virtual environment to install `mkdocs` and its plugins.

```sh
make bootstrap
```

There are several `make` recipes for updating the website.
To start a development server with the website use the below:

```sh
make docs.server
```

Note that the latest pdf as well as any actual protocol markdown's (`docs/full-protocol.md`,`docs/protocol/*.md`)
are auto-generated within the website docs and should not be edited by hand.
Some of the syntax used with `pandoc` is first removed (see `./scripts/pre-mkdocs-sanitize`),
as well as all the individual markdown's combined for the `full-protocol.md`

## Editing Instructions

### Footnotes

Footnotes can be created to appear below the appropriate step. The syntax can be seen below.

```md
1. Useful step that has an additional hint.[^1]

[^1]: Hint better explaining a key detail to step one.
```

If you wish to add an additional footnote within the text and would like to increase the succeeding notes,
you can use `./scripts/increment-footnote`. It takes two positional arguments the starting note to increment and the number of step to increase all notes after it. If you only provide one positional value it will use this as the start and increment by one.

```bash
./scripts/increment-footnote 15 2
```

### Tables

Tables are automatically generated from the `csvs` found in `./tables`. Do not edit the tables generated by latex directly.
To manually regenerate the `latex` for a table you can use the included script.
If you update the csv. `Make` will regenerate the appropriate latex file for you.

```bash
./scripts/csv2latex tables/oligos.csv tex/oligos.tex "Oligonucleotides."
```

### Citations

Citations should follow the format `[@lastnameYYYY]`. Any new citations need to be added to the bibliography in `./bib`

## Legacy Version

The original version of this manuscript can be found in the [legacy](./legacy) directory.

To start with it was converted to markdown using:

```bash
pandoc -s legacy/Gardner.MethodsMolBiol.SubmittedAug2019.docx --wrap=none --reference-links -t markdown -o protocol.md
```

For subsequent changes from the legacy version please see the commit history.
